docs: new expressions (#1361)
kubeshop/tracetest: docs/expressions.md

# Expressions

> Tracetest allows you to add expressions when writing your tests. They are a nice and clean way of adding values that are only known during execution time. For example, referencing a variable, a span attribute or even arithmetic operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tracetest allows you to add expressions when writing your tests. They are a nice and clean way of adding values that are only known during execution time. For example, when referencing a variable, a span attribute or even arithmetic operations.
```

> ## Features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## **Features**
```

* Reference span attributes
* Arithmetic operations
* String interpolation
* Filters

> ### Reference span attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### **Reference Span Attributes**
```

> When building assertions, you will probably need to assert if a certain span contains an attribute and this attribute has a specific value. For this, you can use expressions to get the value of the span. When referencing an attribute, you must add the prefix `attr:` and its name. For example, imagine you have to check if the attribute `service.name` is equal to `cart-api`. You will have to use the following statement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When building assertions, you might need to assert if a certain span contains an attribute and that this attribute has a specific value. To accomplish this with Tracetest, you can use expressions to get the value of the span. When referencing an attribute, add the prefix `attr:` and its name. For example, imagine you have to check if the attribute `service.name` is equal to `cart-api`. Use the following statement:
```

```
attr:service.name = "cart-api"
```

> ### Arithmetic operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### **Arithmetic Operations**
```

> Sometimes we need to manipulate data to ensure our test data is correct. Imagine a purchase operation. Now think how you would make sure that after the purchace, the product stock is smaller than before? For this, we might want to use arithmetic operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes we need to manipulate data to ensure our test data is correct. As an example we will us a purchase operation. How you would make sure that after the purchase the product inventory is smaller than before? For this, we might want to use arithmetic operations:
```

```
attr:product.stock = attr:product.stok_before_purchase - attr:product.number_bought_items
```

> ### String interpolation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### **String Interpolation**
```

> Some tests might require strings to be compared, but maybe you might need to generate a dynamic string that relies on some dynamic value. This might be used in an assertion, or even in the request body referencing some environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some tests might require strings to be compared, but maybe you need to generate a dynamic string that relies on a dynamic value. This might be used in an assertion or even in the request body referencing an environment variable.
```

```
attr:error.message = "could not withdraw ${attr:withdraw.amount}, your balance is insufficient"
```

Note that within `${}` you can add any expression, including arithmetic operations and filters.

> ### Filters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### **Filters**
```

Filters are functions that are executed using the value obtained by the expression. They are useful to transform the data. Multiple filters can be chained together. The output of the previous filter will be used as the input to the next until all filters are executed.

> #### JSON Path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### **JSON Path**
```

> This filter allows you to filter a JSON string and obtain only data that is relevant for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This filter allows you to filter a JSON string and obtain only data that is relevant.
```

```
'{ "name": "Jorge", "age": 27, "email": "jorge@company.com" }' | json_path '.age' = 27
```

If multiple values are matched, the output will be a flat array containing all values.

```
'{ "array": [{"name": "Jorge", "age": 27}, {"name": "Tim", "age": 52}]}' | json_path '$.array[*]..["name", "age"] = '["Jorge", 27, "Tim", 52]'
```

> #### Regex

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### **Regex**
```

Filters part of the input that match a regex. Imagine you have a specific part of a text that you want to extract:

```
'My account balance is $48.52' | regex '\$\d+(\.\d+)?' = '$48.52'
```

> #### Regex Group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### **Regex Group**
```

> If matching one value is not enough for you, you also can define groups for your regex and extract multiple values at once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If matching more than one value is required, you can define groups for your regex and extract multiple values at once.
```

> You must wrap the groups you want to extract with parentheses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wrap the groups you want to extract with parentheses.
```

```
'Hello Marcus, today you have 8 meetings' | regex_group 'Hello (\w+), today you have (\d+) meetings' = '["Marcus", 8]'
```

> ### Get index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### **Get Index**
```

> Some filters might result in an array as result. Sometimes we want to assert just part of this array, this filter allows you to pick one element from the array based on its index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some filters might result in an array. If you want to assert just part of this array, this filter allows you to pick one element from the array based on its index.
```
